A movie star (also known as a film star and cinema star) is an actor who is famous for their starring, or leading, roles in motion pictures.[1][2] The term is used for actors who are marketable stars and whose names are used to promote movies, for example in trailers and posters.
Madow goes on to point out "fame is often conferred or withheld, just as love is, for reasons and on grounds other than 'merit'." According to Sofia Johansson the "canonical texts on stardom" include articles by Boorstin (1971), Alberoni (1972) and Dyer (1979) that examined the "representations of stars and on aspects of the Hollywood star system". Johansson writes that "more recent analyses within media and cultural studies (e.g. Gamson 1994; Marshall 1997; Giles 2000; Turner, Marshall and Bonner 2000; Rojek 2001; Turner 2004) have instead dealt with the idea of a pervasive, contemporary, 'celebrity culture'." In the analysis of the celebrity culture, "fame and its constituencies are conceived of as a broader social process, connected to widespread economic, political, technological and cultural developments."[7]

In the 1980s and 1990s, entertainment companies began using stars for a range of publicity tactics including press releases, movie junkets, and community activities. These promotional efforts are targeted and designed using market research, to increase the predictability of success of their media ventures. In some cases, publicity agents may create “provocative advertisements” or make an outrageous public statement to trigger public controversy and thereby generate "free" news coverage.[5] Movie studios employed performers under long-term contracts. They developed a star system as a means of promoting and selling their movies. "Star vehicles" were filmed to display the particular talents and appeal of the most popular movie stars of the studio.
Movie stars in other regions too have their own star value. For instance, in Asian film industries, many movies often run on the weight of the star's crowd pulling power more than any other intrinsic aspect of film making.
A number of Chinese film actors have become some of the most popular movie stars in Eastern Asia and are also well known in the Western world. They include Jackie Chan, Jet Li, Chow Yun-fat, Stephen Chow, Sammo Hung, Gong Li, Ziyi Zhang, Maggie Cheung, and the late Bruce Lee.
The Indian film industry, of which one is commonly known as Bollywood, has its own set of rules in this aspect. There are often superstars in this region who command premium pay commensurate with their box office appeal. Male Indian actors who are among the most popular movie stars in India and Southern Asia include Rajesh Khanna, Amitabh Bachchan, Dilip Kumar, Raj Kapoor, Dharmendra, Jeetendra, Naseeruddin Shah, Raj Babbar, Mohanlal, Amol Palekar, Aditya Pancholi, Aamir Khan, Shahrukh Khan, Salman Khan, Akshay Kumar, Hrithik Roshan, Arjun Rampal, Govinda, Shahid Kapoor and Anil Kapoor. Actresses include Sridevi, Shabana Azmi, Smita Patil, Kajol, Madhuri Dixit, Aishwarya Rai, Katrina Kaif, Kareena Kapoor, Karisma Kapoor, Manisha Koirala, Tabu, Priyanka Chopra, Preity Zinta, Rani Mukerji, Deepika Padukone, Hema Malini, Madhubala, Meena Kumari, Zeenat Aman, Reena Roy, Vyjayanthimala, and Rekha.

Some mainstream Indian movie stars, like the Khans of Bollywood (Aamir Khan,[8] Shah Rukh Khan, Salman Khan, Dilip Kumar), Raj Kapoor, Nargis,[9] Mithun Chakraborty,[10] Amitabh Bachchan and Aishwarya Rai gained international fame across Asia[11][12][13] and Eastern Europe.[14][15] For example, Bollywood films were popular in the Soviet Union, more so than Hollywood films[16] and occasionally even domestic Soviet films.[17] Indian actors like Raj Kapoor, Nargis[18] and Mithun Chakroborty were household names in the Soviet Union,[10] with films such as Awaara (1951) and Disco Dancer (1982) drawing more than 60 million viewers in the country.[19][18] The Hindi film actors Raj Kapoor[20] and Aamir Khan also became very popular in China, with films such as Awaara, 3 Idiots (2009), and Dangal (2016),[8][20] one of the top 20 highest-grossing films in China.[21]
The film industry of the Malay Archipelago (also known as Nusantara) consists primarily of film industries in Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Singapore. Over the past century, these four cinemas have collaborated on a number of projects. A number of actors from this region have become some of the most sought-after movie stars in southeast Asia, commonly in Malay-speaking countries.

Actors such as P. Ramlee, Rano Karno, Rima Melati, Deddy Mizwar, Jins Shamsuddin, Eman Manan, Alex Komang, Christine Hakim, Fauziah Ahmad Daud, Nora Aunor, Joseph Estrada, Jose Padilla, Nordin Ahmad, Saadiah, Fernando Poe Jr., Roy Marten, and Yusof Haslam are considered movie stars of the 20th century, some of them having acted in all four countries.

Other, more recent movie stars include Romalis Syafril, Erra Fazira, Rosyam Nor, Shaheizy Sam and Maya Karin, from Malaysia; Nicholas Saputra, Vino G. Bastian, Dian Sastrowardoyo, Tora Sudiro, and Iko Uwais, from Indonesia; Claudine Baretto, Piolo Pascual, John Lloyd Cruz, Jericho Rosales, Aga Muhlach, Kristine Hermosa, Dingdong Dantes, and Bea Alonzo, from the Philippines; and a few from Singapore, such as Aaron Aziz and Adi Putra.